Good morning.
Welcome along to the, today for our further consideration
of the UAE Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Legislation Amendment Bill.
Um, we have received your written submission
and welcome your oral submission today.
We have 10 minutes set down for today,
and I'm sure members may wish
to keep some questions hand over to you.
Got it. Thank you. And ma, everybody,
my name's Richard Waff.
I'm the President of the Council of Trade Union,
and beside me is Jack er, uh, from our policy team.
Uh, I'll make a couple of opening comments
and hand over to Jack to go through it.
And I'm sure we would've seen in our submission that, um,
we don't support the trade agreements.
We think New Zealand shouldn't be giving preferential trade,
uh, treatment to countries who routinely, uh, uh,
have poor rights, poor records when it comes
to workers' rights and exploitation.
And certainly UAE is very much in, in that category.
So I'll just gonna be thanks through.
Well, thanks Richard. Uh, Koto, Jack Foster.
Um, so I think, uh, just launching off from
what Richard said, so clearing our submission,
we don't support the agreement as it's currently written,
um, because of the weak and non-binding labor chapter.
Um, but I also, I'd want to preface our comments by saying
that we do, uh, the CT recognizes the importance of trade,
um, to New Zealand's economic development.
Um, we're a small trading nation.
We're at the bottom of the world, highly exposed
to international shocks.
We've got a challenging geopolitical environment,
so it's wise for us to diversify our trade relationships,
um, where possible.
But from our view to be sustainable, uh, in the long run,
trade agreements need to be supporting inclusive, uh,
economic growth, um, need
to be providing genuine opportunities
for economic development for all New Zealanders, um,
good jobs, rising living standards, um,
and they must protect, um, workers fundamental rights.
Um, so we've seen
what happens when trade agreements internationally
fail on this matter.
It can cause, um, cause a lot of resentment, uh,
and backlash to, to, um, to international trade
and, um, globalization.
Um, so yeah, I've used that.
The U-A-U-A-E-C fails to, um, to be a kind
of a modern, um, high quality trade agreement, um, due
to the, the, uh, relatively weak, uh, labor chapter it has.
Um, and so in the rest of my remarks,
I'll just discuss quickly
what the evidence-based tells us about labor rights, uh,
issues in the UAE, um,
and then also what the problems we see
with the labor chapter as it, um,
as it currently stands out.
Um, so you will have read the submission, so I won't go
through it in, in, um, detail,
but it's picking out some of the main points.
Um, labor rights are unavailable, um, for all intents
and purposes to many workers in the UAE, um,
and particularly migrant workers who make up about 90%
of the, um, population, 80 to 90% depending on,
um, who you ask.
Um, the International Trade Union Confederation Global
Rights Index from 2024.
So this is a, a global rights index of, um, how labor rights
and standards rank internationally,
um, in different countries.
They put the UAE in the bottom tier, um, of countries
for labor standards, finding that there is, quote,
no guarantee of rights for workers in the UAE, uh, walk free
and other international, um, NGO estimates
that the UAE has the seventh highest prevalence
of modern slavery in the world, um, at the moment with a
around 130,000 people estimated to be living in conditions
of, uh, modern slavery.
So that refers to situations of exploitation, uh,
that a person cannot refuse or leave
because of threats of violence, abortion,
deception, and so on.
Um, so one of the key problems
for migrant workers in the UUA is the, um, the file system
that's kind of sponsorship
or bonding system whereby, um, migrants visas are tied,
uh, to their employers.
Um, so the system restricts workers' mobility, uh, freedom
of movement, negotiating power.
Um, it kind of exacerbates the inherent imbalance of power,
um, between employer and worker.
And so common recorded abuses, um, relate to wage theft,
physical and sexual abuse, debt bondage,
racial discrimination, confiscation
of passports, and other issues.
Uh, the evidence suggests the UAE is yet to make a kind
of concerted effort to address these issues.
Um, and additionally, the US Department
of State in a 2022 report, um, found, uh,
substantial interference with freedom of peace four,
assembly and Freedom of Association
and quote, the outlawing of independent trade unions
as significant human rights issues,
and the UAE understand why we would,
um, be concerned about that.
Uh, so taken together, the picture in the UAE is one
of incredibly weak labor laws compounded
by weak enforcement, and this creates a very dangerous
environment for workers and in particular for migrants.
So given these issues, the CTU would bind a, um, a, a trade,
a preferential trade agreement
with the UAE on the acceptable if it had, um, very strong,
um, commitments to increase, um, labor protections
and standards in the UAE to, to, um, help lift the UAE.
Um, labor rights and standards are,
and our experience of, um,
trade agreements over the last 30 years
or so is that, um, to be effective labor chapters have
to have binding commitments.
So they need to have binding language, uh, they need
to be enforceable, so that is parties need to have recourse
to dispute settlement provisions in them, uh,
if labor rights have breached.
Otherwise, they kind of become just so many nice words.
Um, so in our view, the, the TSD chapter, the Trade
and Sustainable Development chapter,
which contains the labor provisions in the UAE, um,
falls well short of this,
and we recognize the challenges that, um, government
and officials would've had in negotiating a high quality
labor chapter with the UAE.
Um, that's not at all to cast aspersions on the quality of,
um, of, of the, of officials, um, efforts there.
Um, we also see it as falling the,
the TS C chapter falling well short of the standard C
and other relatively recent trade agreements.
New Zealand has negotiated, uh, including the C-P-T-P-P,
which includes a vast, uh, you know, quite a diversity
of countries, um, developing
and developed economies, uh, falls well short
of the UK N-Z-F-T-A and the eu, um, nz DA.
Um, and so in this respect, we see it as representing a bit
of a backward step in New Zealand's kind of trade agenda.
Um, very quickly, four core problems we see
with the labor chapter from our perspective.
So first largely uses, um, non-binding language, um,
and we are binding languages used.
It's, um, heavily conditional.
Uh, so for example, parties shall endeavor to not seek
to encourage trade or investment by weakening
or reducing the protection afforded in their respective
environmental or labor laws.
This is, um, significantly weaker than, um,
than the text found in the UK or EU agreements.
Um, second, it doesn't contain binding commitments to uphold
or work towards filling the ILOs decent work agenda.
Um, so there's no real commitments from parties in there
to improve the levels of labor protection.
Um, third, despite the well documented, um, problems
of migrant, uh, labor abuse
and modern slavery in the UAE,
there's no binding commitments to address those issues.
And, um, there's only, it's only mentioned, um, kind
of in passing in one provision.
And finally, article 14 point 19 excludes the entire chapter
from dispute settlement provisions anyway.
Um, so even with the few articles
that do contain binding language, uh,
this means there's no way for parties to really be able
to hold each other to account on the commitments they make.
Um, but before wrapping up, I'd also just like
to note our concerns around the rushed timeframe
of the national interest analysis that was, um, completed.
So officials were asked to complete the NAA in an
unreasonably compressed compressed timeframe.
Um, that meant that, um,
we don't really have detailed analysis of the, um,
expected economic costs
and benefits of this agreement, uh,
including unemployment outcomes, regional development
and emissions, for example.
Um, and we also think it's a stretch to claim
as the NIA does,
that the TSD chapter quote provides a solid basis
to support decent work outcomes as outlined
with few binding standards and no enforceability.
We struggle to see how that will be the case.
Um, so yeah, that, I'll leave it there.
Thank you for your, um, attention
and opportunity to make the oral submission.
Um, and any questions we've been happy to say. Excellent.
Thanks, Jack. Alright, first question from Dr. Lauren.
Thank you Chair. Um, thank you for your submission.
Now, this was something both in terms of the
UA E'S concerns about UAE labor, uh, rights, as well
as UAE participation in the, uh,
Sudan Civil War War mentioned they are hearing with mfa.
Now, I'm interested to know,
because you said that you have emailed email submission,
you said that you have contacted MFA
and DM with the broader recommendations from N-C-C-D-U.
What was the response from mfa?
Now, the reason I ask this is
because when we ask that question to mfa, AMFA is like, oh,
well we have mechanisms and we can look into it.
And there are things with very,
in some ways very diplomatic language,
but we hear you saying, saying without those kind of binding
requirements in the TSD chapter, basically,
even if they continue to violate,
there's actually nothing we can do about it.
Is that correct? So, um, can you just clarify the question
is are you asking what NFA responded was two?
Yeah. So two questions, you know,
how did NFA respond to you?
And the end? The second question is, you know,
NFA told us there's mechanism,
but what saying is that, you know, without binding clause,
there isn't any particular thing we can hold accountable
and have this mutual understanding
of labor right law on both sides.
Um, that's not what we heard from Anat, right? Yeah.
So, you know, so yeah,
To the, to the first point, um,
we have a really productive working relationship with MFA
and really value, um, MFA officials, um,
openness to, to work with us.
They provided us opportunities to comment on draft text, um,
of the agreement as it was being negotiated, um,
and opportunities to comment on the draft NIA,
albeit in a compressed timeframe that wasn't, um,
of their own making.
Um, so, and we've, we've found that they, um,
are very receptive to our, um, to our, uh, suggestions
and advice, um, and look forward to ongoing work with them.
Um, on the second issue, I guess there's a, um,
difference in, uh, in our views on
how effective the labor chapter will be.
Um, so we don't see it as realistic that, um,
the cooperation and kind of talking, um,
to each other provisions
that the labor chapter essentially sets out,
we'll do anything substantive, um,
to lift labor standards in the UAE.
And so we would say without binding commitments
and without enforceability, um, the history of,
of New Zealand's trade agreements suggests that, uh,
we won't get any movement,
Just one sub On board.
Damian, no comment. Uh, look, thank you very much.
Uh, very good submission. Um, a couple of things.
I mean, all trade agreements are, uh, negotiation, um,
by degree nature, uh, and whether it's relative or,
or absolute in terms of the commitments, I think is one
that, you know, varies from agreement.
Um, we, we, um,
don't have modern slavery legislation here, do we?
So, you know, it's a bit difficult for us to point to
that specific to terminology, um, in the UAE
and the fact that we haven't committed to
I think two chapters of ILO, um, we've committed
to make progress on those in the EU and uh, trade agreement.
But it's, it's a, would you suggest that, well,
would you say it's a bit difficult for us
to demand an absolute, um, you know,
commitment when we don't have absolute commitments ourselves
in terms of negotiations, so we end up with a relative, um,
agreement in areas like this that is,
and that this commitment is progress from
what might otherwise have been agreed.
I, I, I guess, um, I'll have a, have a go to start with,
I guess, of course everything's relevant.
Uh, um, I think you are correct about that and you know,
but the judgment made are we, are we making progress or not?
Um, there is, we, as we've stated,
we think there is zero progress being made
when it comes to labor standards.
And in fact, when it considered the trade agreements
for the EU and the, in the uk, they were making progress.
And this case we're on the other end of the, of the fulcrum,
the, the EU is re requiring New Zealand
to lift its labor standards to meet the core conventions
of the ILO, um, which is a wake up call for us.
But that's, that's a really important sort
of mechanism we could be playing that kind of role with,
with the EIE and other companies to lift them.
We don't see how we're doing it here.
I, I agree with you, it's relative.
We might not have got the same provisions,
but see the, the other trade agreements,
there has been some progress with countries unlike ours.
We think it was an opportunity to do that.
That's been, that's been missed.
And modern slavery, it, it is a priority for us.
I know it's a priority for many people in this health,
but unfortunately it's not for the current government.
Well, it might be, um, final question.
Can I just say, yeah, so I, I guess the question is
do you think that without expecting, um,
the absolute commitment and,
and clearly the, um, dispute settlement, you know,
absolute commitment to dispute options, um,
there could have been wording
that moved us a little further forward? Yeah,
Yeah, absolutely. There could
have been stronger, um, stronger language used.
So, um, more binding commitments to, for example, um,
work towards improved to lifting labor standards.
Um, more binding commitments not to, um, reduce
or lower labor standards in order
to encourage trader investment, um, such as,
as pretty standard and, and other trade agreements.
Um, more binding commitments, uh, don't need
to use the word modern slavery.
You could use forced or compulsory labor as synonyms.
Um, there is a, there is a clause regard relating to forced
and, um, compulsory labor,
but it's, um, conditional and non-binding.
Um, so the language could have been stronger, um,
and that, um, we don't know how realistic
that would've been in terms of, um,
the UAE agreeing to that.
But our view is that that should be a, um, a bottom line
for, um, New Zealand and offering preferential trade access
is that we expect, um, our, our trading partners
to be playing by the same rules that we do.
Alright, Richard
J Jack, thank you very much for your
time and your submission.
Thank, appreciate it. Thank you very much. Thank, thank
You. Okay. Our
Next submitter is online now Catherine's,
Is she Not coming through?
Okay. Hello. Good morning Catherine. We can hear you.
All right, can you hear us?
Uh, yes, I can hear you very well. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Alright,
we'll received your submission.
Uh, we've got five minutes set down
for your oral submission this morning
and if you wish, you can leave time for questions, Dean.
Thank you.
Okay, well I'll just read fast
and hopefully get it all in.
Um, I oppose this bill
to enter a significant trade agreement
with United Arab Emirates on the grounds that Saudi Arabia
is a Sharia law government with the Quran as the highest.
New Zealand is a Protestant nation planted already
by the seed of Jesus Christ, Protestant law of the Gentiles,
with the King James Bible as the highest
and the Bill of Rights 1688 Will
and Mary, which governs over us all along
with $200 million come $200 million
of Sharia strings.
Protestant and Sharia laws are inherently
repugnant to each other.
In 1835, the Native Chiefs wrote
to German King William IV asking him to come to New Zealand,
but he refused five times as New Zealand had no God law.
Law In 1841 by agreement with the tic states of Germany,
king Tera agreed
to see the Protestant governance in New Zealand
and shiploads of native German Lutheran slaves were
purchased by Tera
and have been held, bonded, bonded to the New Zealand Iwi
for 150 years.
And to this day, in 1858, king Pharaoh,
Pharaoh established the laws of England, the cure.
Maori resurrecting Jesus Christ onto the land
by a section 14 of the blasphemy law was birthed.
In 1983 the English law was removed,
which was a violation of the treaty ofi.
However, I do say to you that any attempt to remove Jesus
and the blasphemy offense
and the blasphemy law is an offense
and a crime against the nation of New monster.
The AB originals, which is all the people in New Zealand
that were not British subjects, all half cast at the time
of King Ou.
Under Under. And Pharaoh. Pharaoh King Pharaoh.
Pharaoh retain the perpetual usage
and protection of the English law
and Jesus Christ of New monster, south Island, New Zealand,
no ye All men.
Special notice two King Soloman, ab
King ch His Majesty, king Charles iii,
his Highness Sheik Mohamed bin Ed Al,
and the deceased Kings King
and King Pharaoh, Pharaoh and King William IV
and King Edward VIII Pope six.
The third and special message to Pope Leo the 14th
that any Islamic
or telematics infiltration of New Zealand is inconsistent
with the 1990 Bill of Rights, section 28
that says other rights will not be affected by the
United Nations Laws
and the Bill of Rights 1688, which is the will of Jesus
and supremacy law.
I oppose any attempt to flourish God's land
with hijabs morning core prayers to Allah.
We do not allow any special prayer rooms, no halal takes
to the people of New Zealand.
I am here to announce the resurrection
of Jesus Christ onto the soil
of new monster New Zealand.
Thank you very much. Right,
and I've left some time for some questions.
Alright, well thank you very much for
that submission this morning.
Do we have any questions from members?
It don't appear to be any questions.
Thank you very much for taking the time this morning
and with your submission, Catherine. Appreciate it.
Yes, thank you very much.
Okay, that brings an end to this submissions
and live stream list.